Nits
I think 1+2 is a glaring ommission, it can be fixed by adding one line.
The other remarks are just comments.

1.
The symbol ; is not present in the index, maybe even missing from the
documentation. It is of course crucially important.
2.
The keyword `comment' lacks from the index.
(Actually I was looking for multiple line comments, there aren't any. apparently).
3.
Add the following line to the paragraph defining sections (introduction 5.2):
"
    A `section' of an assembler program is normally understood as 
    a part of the program that can be mapped independantly from the
    other parts in memory. The keyword SECTION defines such as section.
    Intel uses the word segment which is large and by the same.
    Sections are handled by linkers and their names often define the 
    way it is handled by a linker. This, of course, depends on the
    target a linker is used for.
"
This is to stress that nasm behaves as one would expect from 
a mainstream assembler.

4. I would like to see a comprehensive overview of all assembler 
directives. E.g. I find it difficult to find out whether there is
some where a way to communicate what the entry point is towards the linker.
[I am not arguing that such thing should be present in an assembler.
In your filosofy probably it should not be present in nasm.
This is purely a remark about organisation of documentation.]

5.
I have this book "the 8086 primer" of Stephen Morse.ISBN 0-8104-5165-4
According to the cover "Written by the man responsible for the architectural
definition of the 8086"

You may to want to cite from the book (pg. 122)
"The ASSUME statement on line 2 is a bit harder to explain. I wish 
I could give you a good reason for having it. I can't.
"
There is no doubt, he is really meaning the ASSUME statement 
as such, in general. He then goes on explaining what those people
that made the assembler require you to put in this statement.

6.
The following is apparently acceptable (critical expression)
      X EQU $-$$ 
The following is not
      %assign X $-$$
I think this is a bug because $-$$ is a critical expression all right.
This is very strange in view of the fact that the sequence
      X EQU $-$$
      %assign XX X
is accepted allright!

Apparently this is done using a different mechanism.
Normally assemblers have SET that behave like X, except that 
a redefinition is not an error.
I like this a lot better. The syntax is more symmetric. It is more of 
an assembly variable than something to do with preprocessing.
Probably it is easier to implement.
This really bites me!
7.
If there is an error, there will be no listing.
Young lad, in my days listings were almost exclusively used to
carefully analyse the errors and then submit a new version with 
all the errors removed (and got a listing back two days later with
some errors all the same.) Anyway, I think having a listing is
extremely useful with errors, nothing to be suppressed.

I think NASM is an 
excellent piece of work, the dream assembler for i86,
an assembler like I would have written one.
Because I could have written it, I appreciate the enormous amount of
work that has gone into it.

Please do not drop the comprehensive list of assembler instructions.
It is indispensible in an assembler, and it is an invaluable piece
of information in its own right. I can understand maintaining it is
a chore. Maybe there is a way to generate it from the source, such
that synchronisation is guaranteed, and is it slightly easier to get the
descriptions right.


Albert.


